4061 first day
==============
[[!tag notes/4061]]
---
Info
----
Instructor: Abhishek Chandra

 * Office Hours: TBA
 * Office: KH 4-290
 * csci4061-help@cs.umn.edu

Textbook: *Unix Systems Programming, 2nd Ed* - Robbins & Robbins

Requirements
------------

 * Readings
 * 5 Programming assignments (50%)
  * Teams of 2
  * 2 weeks each
 * Exams (50%)
  * 2 mid-terms
  * Final

Assignments
-----------

 * Written in C
 * documentation
 * Provide code, headers, makefiles, tests, README
 * No re-using code
 * No sharing code

###Grading:

 * Working & correctness
 * readibility & docs
 * successful test cases

Exams
-----

 * Mid-terms are in class
 * Final is 2 hrs, comprehensive

**Open notes, open book**

Objectives
----------

 * OS concepts
 * "programmer's view" of OSes
 * OS interfaces and services
 * emphasis on systems programming
 * Concepts will be applicable to non-unix OSes
  * Processes, File systems, etc.
 * Should be able to:
  * understand OS structure, interface, and utils
  * write good programs
  * understand OS API, tools, libs
  * understand tradeoffs
  * write better programs/systems

Non-Objectives
--------------

Teaching:

 * C
 * OS internals
 * UNIX tools

Class does not cover:

 * kernel hacking
 * using UNIX

Pre-Reqs
--------

 * 2021
 * UNIX environment familiarity
 * Programmings skillz
 * understanding of data structures & algorithms

Basics
======
---
What is an OS?
--------------

    +--------------------------------------+
    |              userland                | Application Layer
    |                                      |
    +--------------------------------------+
    |  processes, file system, virutal     | OS
    |  memory, threads, sockets            |
    +--------------------------------------+
    |  CPU, Memory, Disk, busses, etc.     | Hardware
    |                                      |
    +--------------------------------------+

###User's View

 * Extended Machine
 * Abstraction of Hardware resources

OS should be simple and easy to use, but this comes at the price of
lesser performance.

###Programmer's View

 * Resource Manager
 * Should do efficient division on resources
 * act as an arbiter

The OS should maximize performance.

###System View

 * OS is just a control program
 * Handles HW events, input, etc.
 * Handles concurrent and async event gracefully

The OS should maximize correctness and fairness.

OS Evolution
------------

###G1: Mono programming

 * Direct Programming of hardware

###G2: Mainframes

 * Punch cards!
 * the OS essentially only batches jobs

###G3: Multi-User

 * Execute programs in parallel
 * Time sharing
 * OS does resource management and control
 * MULTICS and UNIX

###G4: PCs

 * Targeted for ease-of-use and GUIs
 * Ex: DOS, Windows, MacOS, Linux, BSD

###G5: Distributed Systems

 * Interconnected devices
 * Internet/cloud-based computing

####Note

I'm going to have to disagree with the instructor here. His examples
were all based in userspace, and implemented on a wide range of OSes
employing a bunch of different OS philosophies.

I think a good OS example of a distributed system would be
[[!wikipedia Plan_9_from_Bell_Labsi desc="Plan 9"]].

Hardware-OS relation
--------------------

 * Provide hardware absrtactions
  * processes, files, virtual memory, etc.

OS-Application relation
-----------------------

 * Provide UIs, libs
 * System calls
 * Signals
